Add tutorial template (#229)
thegooddocsproject/templates: tutorial/about-tutorial.md

# Tutorial articles
# The tutorial template 

Tutorials are learning-oriented lessons that guide you through a series of steps to complete a project.

> They are essential to give new users the feeling that they can quickly achieve something with the product or application.

Reviewer: Correct me if I am wrong. I was wondering if tutorials are intended for users who are interested on advanced features of the product and provides more in-depth information while quickstarts are meant for new users who can get started with the product as quickly as possible

Reviewer 2: Interesting perspective @gayathri-krishnaswamy . I'm not sure that it's 100% clear what the distinction is. I'd be interested in hearing how @deanna-cs thinks of the difference between a quick start and tutorial. My suspicion is that it does have to do with scope and purpose, as you've suggested.

Sidebar: this comment is on text that is being removed from the old tutorial template, so maybe it isn't applicable here?

Reviewer 3: I feel like a quickstart is meant to be an "easy on ramp" to using a product, whereas tutorials are more learning-oriented and teach you about the product's features in more depth. 

But yes, this is old content that I didn't write. Will resolve the conversation.

Reviewer 4: In case you are unfamiliar with it, there are two influential articles which have influenced some of the thinking here:
* https://documentation.divio.com/
* https://ffeathers.wordpress.com/2018/10/08/what-is-a-quickstart-to-you/
In a deep dive doc, it would be worth referencing these sources.

> The tutorial template includes placeholder text that you can replace with your own text. This text is indicated in {curly braces}.

Reviewer 4: Suggest using lists, as per Google Tech Writer training: https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one/lists-and-tables
```suggestion
The tutorial template includes:
* Placeholder text that you can replace with your own text. This text is indicated in {curly braces}.
* Writing instructions, also in {curly braces}.
```

Reviewer 2: +1 to this suggestion.

> 

Reviewer 4: I suggest adding:
* Document version
* Last updated
* Application version

Possible text to use: https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/templates/blob/dev/base/base-template.md

Reviewer 2: Personally, I think it's better to let tools track the last updated metadata. It will be more accurate and require less manual overhead. But this is a question for the project to answer.

@acpkendo and I discussed in last week's general US meeting (the one you missed) that we are not going to version individual templates, we're going to version the templates together as a collection along with doc tools. That's what is defined by a release. We can discuss this in one of his upcoming RFCs if you would like.

Re: application version, I don't know what that means?

> Tutorials are integral to helping your users become acquainted with your product. They are learning-oriented, which means that they teach users how to do something, like learning how to debug a JavaScript application. 

Reviewer 2: **Suggestion (wordsmithing, non-blocking):** "They are learner-oriented, which means that they teach users how to do a practical task, like learning..."

> Tutorials are often confused with how-to guides because they do help users achieve a specific end. However, how-to guides assume that your users have some experience with your product or are familiar with certain concepts. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tutorials are often confused with how-to guides because they do help your users achieve a specific goal. However, how-to guides assume that your users have some experience with your product or are familiar with certain concepts. 
```

Reviewer 2: **Procedural/community governance comment based on Cameron's suggestion:** Should we allow commits from maintainers like this? I can see some value in it as a time-saving mechanism, but one thing I've found problematic is that there's no way to take partially accept the suggestion (such as if you like one part of the edit, but not the other). There also isn't a convenient way to dismiss the suggestion if you don't agree with it. It also creates minor merge conflicts if you make later edits in your local environment.

Reviewer 4: Good question @barbaricyawps. I've been guessing at how to do this best.

In comparison, tutorials help beginners understand the concepts they need to use your product and understand the rest of your documentation. 

> 

Reviewer 2: **Suggestion (wordsmithing, non-blocking):** "In comparison, tutorials give your users hands-on experience with your product so that they can understand key concepts about your product in a more practical context. Hands-on learning often helps learners gain a deeper understanding of the product by helping them see how they can use a tool to accomplish a task they care about."

## About the tutorial template 

> This tutorial can be used in one of two ways: for providing a walkthrough of a particular feature, or walking users through completing a small project. Ideally, your users already completed a quickstart or "getting started" tutorial and have a general understanding of your product. 

Reviewer 4: I suggest breaking options into a list. Ref from Google tech writer training: https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one/lists-and-tables
```suggestion
This tutorial can be used in one of two ways:
* For providing a walkthrough of a particular feature
* Walking users through completing a small project.
Ideally, your users already completed a quickstart or "getting started" tutorial and have a general understanding of your product. 
```

Reviewer 2: +1 to this suggestion.

**Task (note to myself, no need to incorporate into PR):** We need to decide if we use asterisks or dashes for bullets stylistically. I vote for dashes. (Sigh.) I still need to make a style guide for our templates.

Reviewer 4: @barbaricyawps in deciding on dashes vs bullets, I suggest consider the tooling we recommend (such as pandoc or Docs to Markdown https://gsuite.google.com/marketplace/app/docs_to_markdown/700168918607)

### About the "Overview" section

Use this section to provide an overview of what learning objectives or goals users will complete in this tutorial. You can also explicitly state who this tutorial is for and what required background knowledge is needed. 

> 

Reviewer 2: **Suggestion (non-blocking):** Maybe provide a small tip about what makes learning objectives effective vs. ineffective. If needed, you could link out to another guide because there is a TON of instructional design research about this.

Maybe you could also mention that this has benefits to both the tutorial creator (because it helps you get clear about the learning goals of the tutorial) and the reader (because it helps them know if this tutorial will teach them what they are hoping to learn, whether it's appropriate for their current level of understanding, etc.)

### About the "Background" section

The purpose of the background section is to provide any necessary context for your users before they start your tutorial. 

> If you're writing a tutorial that's focused on learning how a particular feature works, you might describe that feature here. For example, a tutorial around using Microsoft Visio's templates to build flowcharts might start with an explanation of how flowcharts are used or what flowchart shapes represent. 

Reviewer 2: Sample comment here!

Reviewer 3: Sample response here! woot

If you're writing a tutorial where you provide users with a starter project, you could describe the project hierarchy here. For example, a tutorial around building a website with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript might explain how the folders are organized, what code is provided for the user, or what they need to add.

### About the "Before you begin" section

Use this section to list any prerequisites for completing the tutorial. This may include operating systems, languages, package managers, or software.

### About the "Steps" section

The steps section is where you describe what the user needs to do. How you write your steps will vary depending on your organization's style guide. 

This template breaks down the tutorial into _parts_. One _part_ of the tutorial may focus on completing several related steps. You're welcome to follow this structure or use the step headings on their own.

#### Tips for writing steps in a tutorial

> 

Reviewer 4: Suggestion: We have captured extra guidance on writing steps at: https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/templates/blob/dev/writing-tips.md#writing-procedural-steps
I think some of that content should be captured in this section. In particular, it includes tips on number of steps to group together. I thought that @aidanatwork also found some research links to back this up.

* When writing your steps, make sure to provide any background information your users may need to complete the task. 
* Remember to orient your users when walking them through each step. If they need to open a particular file or dialog to complete the task, provide that information first.

> 

Reviewer 5: It would be great if we can also include tips on how the headings should be:
My suggestion:
- Start with a verb and express Steps/Part headings as as a complete thought
| Good | Poor |
|---|---|
|Connect to the VM instance| Connect|
|Make a plan for updating your medical coding practices| Make a plan|
|Set up access to a Cloud Storage bucket|Set up access |

Reviewer 3: @Chris-ganta I like that idea!
Do you think there's any value in mentioning that it's best to use the imperative in step headings because gerunds can be harder to translate into other languages? (That's the guidance I've encountered, anyway)

> 

Reviewer 4: I think it would be valuable to have a H4 Title describing numbering, something like:

All procedural docs to have unique sequentially increasing numbers:
Part 1
Step 1.1
Substep 1.1.1
Part 2
Step 2.1
Reason: When two people are discussing the steps (such as instructor and student), they can refer to the specific step they are up to.

### About the "Summary" section

> Use the summary section of the tutorial to sum up what tasks your user completed during the tutorial and what your users now know how to do.

Reviewer 4: Suggestion: Maybe also mention concepts learned.
```suggestion
Use the summary section of the tutorial to sum up what tasks your user completed, what concepts they learned, and what they now know how to do.
```

Reviewer 2: **Suggestion (non-blocking, not in response to Cameron's edit but is commenting on the same section of text):** I feel like I want some more meatier advice about the Summary section. Maybe talk more about the purpose of this section and how it helps the reader. In my mind, the summary section can accomplish many possible rhetorical tasks. Yes, it can summarize what concepts they learned, but it can also talk about why those concepts matter and how they connect to a larger, deeper workflow. It can also have a small marketing function: look at how cool this tool is and how easy the features are to use!

The key is to ask what do you want your reader to think, feel, or do after they've completed the tutorial. What do you want them to notice, what do you want them to be cautious about, etc.

### About the "Next Steps" section

> Use this section to include links to other tutorials, such as tutorials that allow users to learn about other features. You can also include links to relevant resources, like articles, blogs, or videos.

Reviewer 2: Another sample comment

> ## Helpful tips when writing your tutorial 

Reviewer 4: I suggest moving this section above "About the tutorial template". Reasons:
1. People will be more likely to read the writing tips before they start writing.
2. It will mean the headings for filling in template sections will all be grouped at the end, rather than sandwiched between other instructions.

* Keep your tutorial focused. If needed, include links to other pieces of documentation that explain concepts or terms in more depth.

> * If users will copy and paste code samples, make sure they include the following:

Reviewer 4: I suggest move these code tips to the end, so the length based comments are next to each other.

  * Any required `import` or `using` statements
  * Code comments that explain what the code does 

> * Lengthy tutorials can overwhelm users. Consider condensing or removing steps or reevaluating the scope of the tutorial.

Reviewer 2: **Suggestion (non-blocking):** Maybe general tutorial writing tips should go earlier in the document before you get into the tips for each section? Also, I think it would be helpful to provide an example of a code snippet that includes a code comment.
